Once around, StephVenson 2-18.
So, what is this story all about? Well,
Stevenson 218, also known as Stevenson
DFK1 for reasons I'll explain in a
moment, is possibly the largest star in
the universe. It's an extreme red hyper
giant star, at least according to many
of our studies.
as a red giant star, a red super giant,
red hyper giant, it's in the final
stages of its life and is liable to
explode at any moment and leave behind a
black hole. Um, very interesting object
indeed. Located in the southern
constellation of Scutum, one of several
massive
uh, red giant stars in open clusters,
large open clusters in this part of the
sky that contain a lot of these objects.
And in fact, one of the clusters is
called Stephvenson 2 marked inside that
black square on the right of the diagram
there. Um, sometimes these are called
RSGC's,
red super giant clusters. And this is
sometimes called RS
GC2,
but Stevenson 2, named after Charles
Bruce Stevenson, the astronomer who
discovered it in the 1990s using deep
infrared data. And you can see in the
image actually that we can't really see
a star cluster at all because there's
that huge swave of black, dirty, dusty
material blocking it in the optical. But
with the infrared, Stevenson was able to
see through that and make some
interesting discoveries.
The brightest star that he found with in
his infrared images, he numbered one um
but realized later perhaps that it's it
was an outlier on the edge of the
cluster. Perhaps that was making it easy
to identify. Um it's abnormally bright
for the compared to the others in the
cluster and moving in a different way.
So, it's been reclassified as an
unrelated red super giant.
A later study gave it the designation
18. So, we now had two names for this,
Stevenson 2-1 and Stevenson 2-18.
And they even thought that it might be
part of a separate cluster, Stevenson 2
SW, which is stands for Southwest. Um so
now it's been given the new name
StephVenson 2 DFK1
um on the grounds that this will avoid
confusion
but it hasn't because people just can't
make their mind up. So a paper by Hunt
talks about it and assigned the name the
moniker RSGC1-01.
Um, so this is yet another name for the
same object. Although there was already
an object named that which was a
different star in a different super
giant cluster in Scutum. So got to be
careful with this. Things have got
totally confused. But anyway, uh,
Stevenson uh, 2-18, as I'm going to call
it, because there is only one object
that's used that designation at least,
um, is a long way away. 398,000
light years perhaps was the original
estimate. But now that's dropped by
perhaps a factor of 20 to around 19 to
20,000 light years. A big change.
The distance is based on the apparent
brightness that we see and measure and
the luminosity that we think the star
should have.
And the luminosity is estimated from the
temperature. And the temperature is
estimated from the shape of the
spectrum. Stars shine because they are
hot. And hot things give off what we
call black body radiation which has a
particular distribution of um
wavelengths and frequencies of different
energies with fewer of the high energy.
a bulge at the maximum peak
corresponding to the temperature and
then a long tail into the low energy
infrared radiation. And so if we can
look at the spectrum and plot the curve,
we can fit that onto the black body
radiation curve that we know and
understand and that tells us how bright
oh sorry how it tells us what the
temperature is. From the temperature, we
can estimate how bright the star should
be. And from how uh bright it appears to
us, we can use the standard candle rule
and the inverse square law of distance
and allow for other assumptions like
intervening dirt and dust and get
ourselves an estimate of the distance.
But I think you can see that in that
sort of chain of reasoning, there are
quite a few things that could go wrong.
Now, I mentioned that uh we're not sure
whether or not it was part of the
original cluster Stevenson 2. And the
reason for that is that in looking at
the spectrum, you can also see the
spectral lines of absorption and
emission in the light coming from the
star. And from that, we can work out
what it's made of. But we can also tell
the Doppler shift, the red shift or blue
shift depending on whether it's moving
away from us or towards us. And S218 is
moving away from us at 89 km/s,
whereas the other cluster stars are
moving 20 km/s faster, doing 109.
And that missing 20 km/ second kind of
initially people thought that's proof
that it's not part of the cluster. But
what we think might be happening is that
this very massive star is puffing off or
radiating furiously and driving away its
outer envelope. And the outer envelope
is moving out from the star in every
direction. And of course the bit we can
see is the bit that's between us and the
core of the star and is coming our way
as the uh radiation pressure forces it
away from the core. It's coming outwards
and towards us. And the typical
expansion rate for such an envelope on a
massive star like this would be around
20 km/s
in which case the sums all add up. And
so perhaps S218 is part of the cluster.
The other grouping that uh was assumed
was this Stevenson 2 southwest and uh
that was in the end assumed to be at the
same distance as the main cluster um
containing a whole lot of other red
super giants including a very
interesting one Stevenson 2 DFK49
to use the DFK nmanllete and so doesn't
really matter whether S218 is part of
one cluster or the because we think
they're both at the same distance from
us.
So physically one of the largest stars
we know a a red super giant or even a
red hyper giant uh depends on your
terminology really a very big star the
possibly the biggest star in the
universe. much bigger than the sun, much
bigger even than UY Scouti which was a
previously detected very large red giant
star and uh even than YV Canis Majorus
which used to be the record holder. So
absolutely enormous. If we compare it
against the sun, you can see that tiny
tiny little pixel there labeled with the
sun and the corresponding size of
Stevenson 218.
2,100 times the diameter of our star. If
it was in the middle of the solar
system, it would go all the way out to
Saturn. Absolutely enormous.
Now again we can measure the temperature
and we find that it seems to be 3,200
Kelvin and we can estimate the
brightness
and we get 440,000
times the power output of sol.
Now that's all well and good but these
sizes are breaking the theoretical
models. We have our models that suggest
that the most powerful you could have
and the largest sup red super giant
shouldn't be bigger than 1500 times the
diameter of our sun. So 2100 is uh too
big. So it's making life difficult for
the modelers there. Now it could be that
we've got the brightness wrong or we've
got the temperature wrong. probably got
the temperature right, but uh maybe the
chain of reasoning about the size and
brightness is what's letting us down
there. We think it's a very massive
star, somewhere in that range of 30 to
50 solar masses. Um so not the most
massive star in the universe. We have
seen some that are over 100 times the
mass of our sun. um and certainly
getting old for its size. Somewhere in
the range 14 to 20 million years and
stars of 30 to 50 solar masses only last
about that long. So no surprise that
this is in its red giant phase um where
it is reaching the end of its life.
Again, you can see the tiny little dot
of the sun there marked just for scale.
Now, those brightness estimates in 2010,
we they estimated the distance at 18,000
light years and a luminosity of 90,000
suns. Two years later, they've come out
with a new figure uh which has given us
440,000 times and most recently 630,000
times because the distance has been
increased again. So there's a lot of
variability in these estimates. Uh but
it does seem that it may well be
obscured by more reening dust than we
thought and so maybe an absolute
monster. If it is, and the age estimates
are right, then it's due to die anytime
soon and very very likely to explode as
a supernova and directly form a black
hole in the uh core. It's so big that it
it won't stop at forming a neutron star.
Um it will create a black hole directly.
And along with that, it's very much on
the brink. There's a lot of material
being ejected. We've already seen that
in the estimates of the radial velocity
of the ejector coming towards us. But as
it's losing mass at an incredible rate,
uh puffing off these outer layers of
very very uh tenuous but nevertheless
hot material, ejecting it into space.
It's going to evolve and it's not clear
whether it's going to blow up
or become what's called a luminous blue
variable, a blue giant star that
pulsates having lost all of the hydrogen
from its outer layers. You get helium as
the next element that was made in an
inner shell exposed. And these uh very
high temperature helium stars
tend to pulsate and become variables,
luminous blue variables or even wolf ray
stars uh where they continue to lose
enormous amounts of mass. And I've done
a another video all about wolf ray stars
if you're interested.
So, as I said, the temperature 3,200
Kelvin is calculated by looking at the
spectrum. And you can see the spectrum
at the top there. We have the the flux
uh versus the wavelength. And you can
see lots of different spectral lines
from iron, from titanium, from calcium,
uh other elements all in there. Uh very
high resolution spectrum. So we we learn
a lot from that and we can use what's
called the dusty computer model. These
things have to have a good acronym to
try to understand the temperature. And
that's where we get the 3,200 from. But
that's too cold. It's cooler than the
coolest other red super giants that we
see and are predicted by our
understanding of the theory. So again,
this one is definitely bending if not
breaking the theory somewhat. And the
explanation is that maybe it's not yet
fully finished forming. So maybe this is
still quite young. Um very massive star
indeed burning very fast. And although
it appears to be dying around the outer
layers, giving off all that material, it
may well still be settling in the center
with the denser material sinking within.
Um so
when we try to look at these
possibilities of these very young stars,
something that has been noted by
Japanese astrophysicist Hayashi is a
thing called the Hayashi track. And this
is on the Herzbrung Russell, the HR
diagram of temperature versus
luminosity.
You get that diagonal line which
corresponds to the
bottom right hand corner for little red
dwarfs at 0.1 solar masses. Up to the
middle sunlike stars at 1.0 and then up
here we've only got as far as six solar
masses on this particular chart.
Uh but what happens is that as stars
form they don't magically appear on that
diagonal on that main sequence. They
start towards the up and right a bit
where the uh envelope of the colored
lines is limited. And at this stage
they're proto stars or Tori stars that
are radiating energy released from
gravity even if they haven't yet kicked
off nuclear fusion. So they have an
extra boost of gravitational potential
energy as they shrink and differentiate
and the denser materials sink into the
center and so forth. So they end up
being a bit too bright for their mass
and so they sit on this upper track and
then as they shrink they uh move along
that track down along the blue lines
onto the correct position on the main
sequence as they mature into the
ordinary hydrogen burning stable phase.
So as they contract, the temperature
tends to remain fairly constant,
particularly for the small ones, and
that drives them vertically down the
diagram from the upper red lines to the
later uh main sequence at the bottom of
the diagram. As the mass goes up, that
line takes a slightly different course
and ends up being more horizontal with a
little kink in it. Um, so we think we
understand all of that. And the problem
is that uh Stevenson 218 doesn't seem to
fit because you notice that the larger a
ma uh the mass of the star, the hotter
[snorts] it tends to be, the brighter it
tends to be with those solar masses up
there at five, six or even greater all
being at the top left hand side of the
diagram. Um, and the temperature in
thousands of Kelvin along the bottom
there goes from just 4.4 to three 3.5,
which is the bottom end of things. Um,
it doesn't go any further. So 3,200 is
off the chart. You're actually in what's
called the forbidden zone. Um, and we've
got the equation there for the amount of
energy. Um and you can see it's
interesting in that it involves um 4 pi
gton's constant that tells us about
gravity uh mu over k h which uh
interesting parameters the mass the
radius the pressure and the temperature
all factor into it. So what we get is
this forbidden zone
and really
it all goes back to that Stefan Boltzman
law which I've talked about. This is the
law of uh the radiation of energy from
an object based on its temperature and
its size. So L the luminosity the
brightness is 4 pi R 2 where R is the
radius times the temperature to the 4th
power and times that little constant
sigma there which is uh just a constant
to get the units correct. And so it's
proportional to this the 4 pi r 2 which
is the surface area of the object and
the fourth power of the temperature of
that surface.
And that's how if we know the
temperature and the luminosity, we can
work the size out. We know T and we know
L. Then we can work out how big
something must be. Or if you know any
two of the others, you can get the third
one. Uh but this hayashi track again
separates us into the allowed region
where we're towards the left, higher
temperatures and smaller radi for each
given luminosity. and the forbidden
region of low temperatures and large
radially
if you are going to have the same
luminosity if you lower the temperature
T then the radius has to be bigger and
Stevenson
2-18 is in the forbidden zone so
something very very strange is happening
about it now I talked about the mass
loss as it's losing all of that outer
layer blowing the hydrogen away works
out to be a solar mass mass every 80,000
years being blasted into space. And this
too is a record holder. It's the highest
known for any red super giant. And
there's a possibility that there's been
a a recent outburst um in human time
scales, not observed by anybody because
this is so far away and hard to see, but
maybe there is a thick ring of dust um
that is accounting for a lot of our
problems here. So that's one
possibility.
It's also doing something that
some of these other red hyper giants and
super giants do. It's emitting microwave
laser light mazes.
[clears throat]
U these were the first detected from
space back in 2012 uh as waterbased
mazes. So water molecules in and around
the outer reaches of the star being
energized by uh the power of
electromagnetic radiation and the
magnetic fields coming away from the
star and caused to fall into lock step
in this stimulated emission of radiation
which is uh in the case of light. Laser
stands for light amplification by
stimulated emission of radiation. And
here it's microwaves. So MAR
actually something that Einstein
predicted. He got around, didn't he? Um,
and it seems to be in this envelope of
the star that this mer effect is coming
away. And not only have we detected
water, but also silicates. So sandy
rocky material giving off these
particular wavelengths 10 micrometers 18
micrometers ma radiation. Um and so this
provides another way of studying it and
the fact that there's so much silicate
so silicon and oxygen present in this
material. This is stardust. This is dust
being emitted by the star showing that
actually it's got quite large quantities
of those heavier elements in it. Uh
again pointing to imminent death. So a
fascinating object indeed. This red I'm
going to call it a hyper giant. Um
there's still that doubt and we need to
know more. It's always the case for a
lot of these objects that the more you
delve into the astrophysics of what's
going on, the more you find that there
are things that we just don't know yet.
Uh, one of the things I love about
astronomy. So, I'll leave you with a
picture of the red hyper giant Stevenson
218. And thanks very much for listening
to that one.